I hope you found the demo in the previous video to be enticing.
In this video, I will show you how to apply a generalized Eigen decomposition analysis to real data.
You will see that although the basic concepts are the same as in the previous video, it's considerably
trickier to implement, in part because of some challenges that arise with numerical stability in large
data sets.
So here in this video, I will begin by telling you about something called a two stage compression separation
procedure.
Then I will give an overview of the code demo.
And of course then we will have a deeper look in the Python code.
So the idea of a two stage separation procedure is to first compress the data to a smaller number of
dimensions Mentions and then run the GED on the reduced dimensional space.
The reason why you would do this is if the generalized eigendecomposition problem cannot be solved,
and that often happens with severely reduced ranked data or very large data sets, by which I mean lots
and lots of variables.
And for LM activations, the matrix rank generally isn't a problem, although the matrix sizes actually
do present an issue.
Overall, this two stage procedure is a pretty useful technique.
It generally improves the solution.
The primary risk of compressing the data, which I've discussed earlier in the course when talking about
effective dimensionality, is that by reducing the dimensionality, you are excluding low variance but
possibly important variability in the data.
That's just a general risk of compression.
It's certainly not unique to this analysis in particular.
So now let me explain how this two stage procedure works.
First you do a principal components analysis of the data matrix to get the eigenvectors and the eigenvalues.
Next you pick a threshold for including principal components in the compressed data.
There are several ways that you can pick a threshold.
This indicates one way of choosing the threshold, which is to preserve all of the components that individually
account for at least 1% of the variance in the data set.
That's just one option in the code demo.
In a few moments, I will show you a slightly different threshold, which is to keep all of the components
that collectively account for 99% of the variance, even if some of them are individually less than
1%.
Okay.
Then you project the data onto the eigenvectors, which gives you a new data set.
Now this data set has a smaller dimensionality, but it still contains 99% of the variance of the original
data.
And then finally you run the generalized eigendecomposition as I explained in the previous video.
But on matrix Y the compressed data instead of on matrix X, which is the original data.
So now the source separation is done on the compressed data.
And you can continue just working with the compressed data.
It's also possible to project the eigenvectors back onto the original full dimensionality data space.
If you want to work with the raw activation values.
I will show you how to do that towards the end of the Python demo.
Okay.
And with that out of the way, let me now tell you what I will show you in the Python demo in a moment.
I'll start by importing GPT two and hooking all of the MLP neurons in the expansion layer before the
nonlinear activation.
I'm going to use the pronouns dataset that you've already seen a few times now, and grab all the activations
to the target words from the MLP neurons.
Then I will calculate the covariance matrices for the two target words so him and her, and then subtract
those two.
And that's what you see here.
And to reiterate what I introduced in the previous video, if we would do a PCA on, let's say, the
average of these two matrices, that would tell us the patterns in the data that are common between
these two matrices.
And we could use that for compression for dimension reduction.
But the generalized eigendecomposition is not doing that.
Instead, the generalized eigendecomposition will reveal the patterns in the data that separate these
two matrices, which in practice means the linear combinations of the neurons that best separates activations
for him versus for her.
Now I'm actually going to try running a generalized eigendecomposition on these full covariance matrices
from all the neurons.
It's going to fail, but it will be interesting to see it fail and to see what the error message is.
And so that will lead me to applying the two stage procedure that I just described in the previous slide.
Here you see the scree plot for the average of the two covariance matrices.
And it turns out that in this particular case, 63 components in the data account for 99% of the total
variance.
So then I will compress the MLP expansion data set.
So these data here down to 63 components.
And here you see the covariance matrices for the two data sets in the compressed space.
So these matrices are now 63 by 63.
But 99% of the variance in these matrices is also present in these matrices.
Now the most obvious feature that you see here is that the colors are much more saturated around the
top and the left sides of this matrix.
That is simply because the components are sorted by their eigenvalue, which means the components just
account for a lot more variance in the data.
Those are placed early on.
And these components down here are accounting for less total variance.
That is not a problem or a concern for this source separation.
It's just how the dimensions get sorted.
So it turns out that these covariance matrices are still reduced rank.
And therefore I will apply shrinkage regularization to get them back to full rank.
So the covariance matrices.
Originally had a rank of 52, and after applying 1% shrinkage, they now have a rank of 63.
Which is full rank.
That's great, because it means that we have a manageable sized matrix that the SciPy library is capable
of handling.
And they're also full rank now.
Full rank matrices are not necessary for the generalized eigendecomposition in theory, but in practice,
having full rank matrices does help with the numerical stability, and it helps get a good solution.
Okay, so now at this point we are ready for the GED analysis.
The rest of the code in this demo will involve various ways of visualizing and exploring the data.
Here you see the scree plots and the eigendecomposition for him versus her and also for her versus him.
So I ran the analysis twice, putting the covariance matrices in different orders to get a filter,
a pattern that maximally separates him from her, and a different one that maximally separates her from
him.
So you can see they both have some pretty nice separability, in the sense that the first component
is larger than the rest of the components.
Uh, you know, like noticeably larger, not just numerically a tiny bit larger.
And it looks like there might even be two components here that cleanly separate him from her.
But certainly for convenience, I'm only going to be focusing on the top component here.
Okay.
So these are the eigenvalues.
And when we have the eigenvectors we can use those to filter the compressed activation values to get
a component score for each target word in each sentence.
And that's what you see here.
So for the GED of him versus her.
We can see that this component shows lots of activation.
So strong activation for him words.
And also simultaneously a suppression of the activation for the her tokens and the reverse for her versus
him.
So nice balance here.
Now the y axis values are difficult to interpret here because the numerical values depend on the eigenvectors
which are not constrained to be unit norm the way that the eigenvectors are unit normed in PCA, which
is an eigendecomposition on one symmetric matrix.
So don't worry about comparing the two axes numerically.
You can just focus on the relative values within each plot.
Okay, so there's a few other plots that I will show, including some randomly random permutation of
these sentences to demonstrate that these kinds of effects that you see here are not due to overfitting
noise.
The final plot that I will show is this pair of plots here, where we see an example sentence with the
tokens on the x axis and the activations on the y axis.
Now the pairs of data points for each token corresponds to the data projected onto the Him component
for the same sentence, but with him versus with her.
So remember there's pairs of sentences.
So 54 sentences with him and an equal number of sentences with her.
So this is the sentence with him on it.
And then this would be the activation for exactly the same sentence.
But the 154 sentences later which has all of these same tokens, but this one is replaced with a her.
So basically what you see here is that this latent component that I identified using generalized eigendecomposition
is roughly equally active for all the tokens in the sentence.
But then here, for when the sentence was him, we see large activation, and when the exact same sentence
had her, we see low activation.
And this one over here is the complementary plot.
So exactly the same analysis, exactly the same words.
But this is now pushing all the data through the generalized eigendecomposition defined as her greater
than him.
This was him greater than her.
And you see, again, the activations for most of the tokens is the same or really, really similar.
And then we see this really strong difference for him versus her.
In other words, these components really differentiate between him and her, but they do not really
differentiate the other tokens so much.
Although yeah, some exceptions you do see a little bit of differences here.
Okay.
Well there's a lot to look at in the code.
So let's switch to Python and go through it.
So import some libraries as you know from the previous video, we used scipy linalg instead of numpy
dot linalg for the generalized eigenvalue decomposition problem.
Okay.
And then here I import the GPT two small model and of course its tokenizer.
Here is the hook.
I'm just kind of arbitrarily defining this to be the middle layer, whichever one happens to be close
to the middle.
And yeah, we can just look in this in a little bit more detail in the code challenge in the next video.
So here again are these sentences.
You've now seen these many times.
I'm not going to discuss those anymore.
Certainly not in this video.
Here I'm getting the target tokens.
Okay.
You've seen all this stuff before.
Push all the data through the model.
Here I'm getting the activations and defining a variable for Nhidden.
I have previously called this n neurons.
These are hidden units.
Okay.
Here I'm getting activations.
You've also seen this before.
just looping over the sentences.
Finding the index in which the target word appears on this sentence, and grabbing those activations
that I do.
Because here for the generalized Eigendecomposition analysis, I only want to use the target word activations.
I do not want to use any other tokens in this text until later.
So that comes at the very end.
Okay.
Yeah.
So here is just some visualizations.
This you've also seen before a lot of this code.
I just kind of copy paste and keep propagating from one thing to the next.
Okay.
So this is new though these are the covariance matrices.
Now the covariance matrices are actually ten times bigger than what you see here.
I'm skipping every 10th row and column.
That is purely for the visualization.
The neat thing about a generalized eigendecomposition is when you look at these matrices just visually,
you know, they're interesting.
They're neat to look at.
You know, maybe they look like some magic eye painting or something like that.
But it's not obvious that there are really remarkable differences between these.
So the goal of the generalized eigendecomposition is to find some pattern.
It's going to be a subtle, nuanced pattern that is distributed across all of the neurons, all of the
variables.
And it is a pattern that maximally differentiates this covariance matrix from this covariance matrix.
And that pattern is just distributed across all of these pairs.
So it's not really obvious what that pattern would look like just from looking at these matrices.
Okay.
So here I'm going to do something that will not work but it will be fun.
So basically yeah we just get some errors.
Uh, in principle there would be ways to address this.
But the thing is, when you get to really large matrices with lots and lots of variables that generalize.
Eigendecomposition is just such a difficult mathematical problem to solve in practice, especially with
reduced rank matrices, that it's just it's just very difficult.
So let's actually look at this linalg dot matrix rank.
I'm just curious what the rank of these matrices is.
Okay.
So that took 19 seconds to calculate the rank.
And that's because Timkov it is a 3000 by 3000 matrix.
And yet it only has a rank of 52.
There are lots of interesting reasons why that is the case.
I'm not going to talk about them here.
I did talk about it a little bit in the, uh, effective dimensionality lectures.
But yeah, suffice it to say that these are severely reduced rank.
Now, generalized eigendecomposition Composition in theory can be run on reduced rank matrices even
when both the matrices are reduced rank, but when the rank is just so much lower than the size, that's
when you really start running into some numerical issues.
Okay.
So therefore we are going to do the two stage procedure.
So here I'm getting the eigendecomposition.
This is both covariance matrices.
But this is not a generalized eigen decomposition.
I'm actually just inputting one matrix to be eigen decomposed.
And that is the average of these two covariance matrices.
Okay.
So then I get the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors sorting the eigenvalues.
And uh and then also the eigenvectors.
And note here that we sort the columns not the rows.
So we preserve all of the rows and we sort along the columns.
Okay.
This gets a little confusing because uh, in the next video we're going to actually run the principal
components analysis using the SciPy library using a scikit learn, and that actually swaps the eigenvalues.
It puts the eigenvalues in the rows instead of the columns.
And why it does that I think just to intentionally confuse people.
Maybe.
Anyway, uh, from these eigenvalues, I am transforming them into a percent variance explained.
So again, the idea is that 100% of the magnitude of the variance in this data set in this 3000 by 3000
covariance matrix, 100% of the variance is somehow contained in all of the eigenvalues.
So to transform this into percent variance explained, we just sum them all up.
Uh, all of the eigenvalues.
And that's in the denominator.
And then we multiply by each element of the eigenvectors matrix.
Okay.
And then computing the cumulative sum and seeing how many components it takes to explain above 99% of
the variability in the data.
And this turns out to be 63, I think.
By the way, if you are a linear algebra aficionado, you might be wondering how it is possible that
this number is larger than 52, which was the rank of the data.
This turns out to be other just issues of difficulties with numerical calculations of such large and
reduced rank matrices, and basically calculating the rank is an extremely difficult problem.
So generally people do not calculate rank.
They estimate rank using a threshold, and depending on the threshold that you use, you're going to
get a different result.
If you're in my linear algebra course, I talk about that in a lot more detail.
Anyway, suffice it to say that here we get an answer of 63 components, which is great.
So now we will multiply the activations matrix by the eigenvectors.
And we just want the first 63.
And that means that now we have 108 by 63 instead of 108 by 3072.
Okay.
Now from here.
So this is our new data matrix here.
So now we can calculate covariance matrices again and then visualize them again.
And then this is what I showed in the slides.
Yeah.
These are just the covariance matrices of 99% of the data variance oriented into the top 63 principal
components okay.
And here I'm applying the shrinkage.
So I'm setting gamma I'm just fixing this to be 1% 0.01.
And yeah you should recognize this code from the previous video.
So basically we take the covariance matrix.
We knock it down.
So we scale it down Globally a tiny bit by 1%.
And then we take gamma.
So the regularization amount times the average of all of the eigenvalues.
So this here ends up being a scalar.
This is just a number times the identity matrix which of course is zeros on the off diagonal and ones
on the diagonal.
Okay.
And by the way you could also use the SciPy library here.
Uh eigendecomposition in numpy is great for one matrix.
It's really just for the generalized eigendecomposition that numpy is no longer suitable.
Okay.
And then I'm giving these different names.
So I say I just add an s at the end for shrinkage.
And that's because uh later on I'm going to use the non shrinkage regularized matrix for the numerator
matrix.
And this one for the denominator matrix.
I'll get to that in a moment.
Okay.
Now in theory Everything we've done is with real valued matrices and all the matrices are symmetric.
So the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors should all be real valued.
However, just because of some precision errors and limitations in NumPy and SciPy, it does sometimes
happen that these matrices will have tiny, tiny, tiny imaginary values which are not actually valid.
So therefore we can just force this to be real valued.
That's what I do here.
And that's why you get this error message here.
Casting complex values to real discards the imaginary part.
Totally fine.
This is not an error message.
It's just a warning message.
That's just because I'm forcing these to be real valued and not complex valued.
Okay, so here we see the impact of shrinkage regularization.
They went for the covariance matrices, went from having a rank of 52 to a rank of 63, which means
they are full rank.
Okay, so now we are ready for the generalized eigen decomposition.
Here I am running the analysis twice, one for him versus her and once for her versus him.
This is not something that I explicitly demonstrated in the previous video.
But basically what we want here is to get two filters.
So two sets of patterns.
One pattern that maximizes activations for him and one that activates maximizes activations for her.
And the way to do that is really simple.
We literally just swap the matrices around.
So here I put in him and then her, and here I put in her and then him.
By the way, in theory this is not necessary.
In theory, we can do both of these in one go by looking at the top eigenvalue for him, and then the
lowest eigenvalue, the smallest eigenvalue will actually be the one that maximizes her over him.
That said, that's the theory.
In practice, it's not quite that simple just because of numerical issues and the way that these eigenvectors
and eigenvalues are estimated.
So therefore it's better to just run a second analysis like this.
Okay.
So notice also here I'm using for the denominator matrix the shrinkage regularized version.
And here I'm using the full version without any shrinkage regularization.
In principle you can also do this.
That's totally fine.
But what people often do is say you know we we want to uh adulterate the numerator matrix as little
as possible.
We want these data to be, like as pure as we can leave them.
And we're willing to smooth out the, uh, the reference covariance matrix because, yeah, this is
just like a reference matrix to compare against.
So therefore this is a fairly typical approach.
You would just regularize the denominator matrix and not the numerator matrix.
Okay.
Otherwise this code looks very similar to the code for the principal components analysis.
We get the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors.
We sort the eigenvalues.
And then we also sort the columns of the eigenvectors matrix.
Notice also the variable naming convention I'm using here.
So evals and him versus her.
Okay.
So then yeah we can make a plot of the eigenvalues.
And this is what I showed in the slides by the way.
They can have different numerical scaling which is not really that relevant.
So therefore you can see like the raw eigenvalues are meaningful, but it just indicates something about
the scale of the data and the separability in the data.
So therefore if you're comparing multiple spectra in the same plot, it's often easiest just to max
normalize them like this.
Okay, so now we see for her versus him, we get this beautiful separation, really nice distance between
the first and the second eigenvalue compared to the distances between all of the other eigenvalues.
So they all go down trivially because yeah, we we sorted them for exactly that reason.
But it's not trivial that this distance is much bigger than this distance.
And these distances are all fairly small.
The him versus her separability also looks great.
As I mentioned in the slides.
Maybe there's a second independent component for processing him pronouns versus her pronouns.
But yeah, for convenience we're just going to look at the the top one okay.
So once we get those eigenvectors we can generate the projection data.
And that is literally the activations times the eigenvector.
And here we want the top eigenvector.
So it's the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue and it's multiplying.
Of course the data in the lower dimensional space because these were based on the lower dimensional
space covariance matrices.
Okay.
And so that's how I get these plots.
So it's pretty remarkable.
You see that the generally generalized eigen decomposition has two impacts.
One it boosts the category that you're looking for.
And two it suppresses the category that you use as the reference.
So we see not only do we get increased activation for him over here and for her over here, we also
see a suppression of the activation for her over here and him over here.
Pretty neat.
So the interpretation of what a generalized eigen decomposition does, which I've already stated now
a few times is basically look at these covariance matrices and identify patterns that are distributed
across the different variables that maximally distinguish this covariance matrix from this covariance
matrix.
So the question is what do those patterns look like.
How can we visualize those patterns.
And that is the next analysis that we do here.
So the answer without getting into the mathematical details that justify why this is the right approach.
But basically the idea is you take the covariance matrix and you push that through the eigenvector.
So it's the eigenvector times the covariance matrix of the s.
So the numerator covariance matrix.
And that's what this gives us.
And then I'm again multiplying through the eigenvectors from the principal components analysis.
And that's to get me from the reduced dimensional space back to the original data space which is the
3072 MLP neurons.
So also just a linear algebra point here.
When we were compressing down we post multiplied by V.
And now we are expanding back out the dimensionality.
And so now we are pre-multiplying by the eigenvectors.
Okay.
So now you see that these two eigenvectors or patterns are somewhat correlated with each other.
So there is some overlap in how these patterns look to differentiate each other.
Now it will be interesting in the next video in the code challenge.
In the next video you are going to create these data for each individual layer.
And you will calculate this correlation.
And then we will see how this correlation changes as a function of depth into the model.
That would be a pretty interesting analysis to look at.
Okay.
In general there are several ways to perform statistics on these kinds of Analyses.
One thing that I will do here is just randomize the sentence order and then rerun the analysis.
So basically I'm just doing the analysis over again but with random ordering.
So and here you see it just doesn't work that well.
Uh, it does look like we get some separability, but the projection of the data onto this eigenvector
is just not clearly separating him from her.
So yeah, this is only one permutation.
Uh, but it does certainly indicate that the results that we see, uh, here are not purely due to overfitting
the data.
Uh, there's several ways to do statistical analyses.
Uh, this is one.
Another thing we're going to do in the next video is have an independent data set.
So in the next video we will fit the eigenvectors based on these data and then apply the eigenvectors
to a completely different data set that the model hasn't seen when calculating the generalized eigen
decomposition.
Okay.
So then the final plot that I'm showing here is this one which I showed in the slides.
So basically we have all of the tokens.
Now remember the eigen decomposition.
This analysis was only run on the activations to him and her.
And now I also applied it to all the other tokens.
And what you see is that all the other tokens are mainly preserved.
There's a little bit of residual distinction here, but mostly they are preserved.
And then you see this really big difference here.
So this is for the eigen decomposition for him versus her.
And this is for her versus him.
And again these two sentences are the same.
They only differ by this one word which is him uh, for uh for the black dots.
And it's her for the red squares.
So now what you can do if you want to continue exploring is basically pick any number here as long as
it's below 53 because or below 54 because I'm manually coding this here.
So it just happens to work out okay.
So here you see another activation.
Again.
You know there's some differences for other tokens.
But the most striking difference is this flip in the activations for processing him for the him eigendecomposition
and processing her for the her eigendecomposition.
And yeah, you can keep exploring this.
You can see here how this analysis works.
But yeah basically just taking the data, the original data.
So the activations in the original MLP space, compressing them down and then multiplying them through
the each of the two top eigenvectors.
I hope you don't feel overwhelmed by this analysis.
This is some fairly advanced applications of linear algebra to complicated large data sets, and it
really takes a while to wrap your head around what it means and why it works.
In fact, I have an entire separate course that is really just focused on this one particular source
separation method generalized Eigendecomposition.
This course is focused on neuroscience data, but I do try to make the course general enough that it
can be used for a wide variety of topics.
Now, to be totally clear, I'm not telling you to take this course.
This course is certainly not part of the LLM course that you are right now watching.
I just want to highlight that this method generalized Eigendecomposition I've now tried to explain in
only two relatively short videos, is something that I spend 4.5 hours to unpack in more detail, and
that's not even including all that stuff beforehand, like PCA and covariance matrices and so on.
Generalized eigen decomposition has been used in lots of different disciplines, and has proven to be
a really powerful method for identifying patterns in data that separate two different categories.
Now, when you're working with very small data sets, the method is easier to apply.
And so llms pose some interesting challenges in this kind of analysis approach.
In this video, I showed a few ways to see if our results were due to overfitting.
Although none of them was really that statistically rigorous, I have to admit a more rigorous approach
would be to validate the findings on a test set that the Eigendecomposition was not exposed to, and
you're going to have an opportunity to do that in the code challenge in the next video.
And I can already tell you that it's going to work out really well in the sense that the cross-validation
performance will be quite good.